docs: custom ui (#1210)
ory/docs: docs/concepts/custom-ui-headless-api.mdx

---
id: custom-ui-headless-api
title: Integration Basics
sidebar_label: Integration Basics
toc_max_heading_level: 4
---

```mdx-code-block
import Tabs from "@theme/Tabs"
import TabItem from "@theme/TabItem"
import CodeBlock from "@theme/CodeBlock"
```

Ory provides headless APIs for ease of integration. This ensures that Ory provides compatibility with many software stacks across
different programming languages.

> This documents' focus is to provide concrete examples on custom UI integration. Flows are the fundamental of Ory's self-service

Reviewer: In the end, it is not really clear how to render a form from a flow, or when to create a flow in the UI in the first place. The page does really answer the question posed here.

APIs and are used to accomplish a variety of goals, such as `login`, `registration`, `settings`, `verification` and `recovery`.

The self-service `flows` are standardized so that it follows the same steps regardless of which `flow` is integrated.

A general overview of the flow can be summed up in two steps:

> 1. Get or create the `flow` data, e.g. login, registration etc.
> 2. Submit the `flow` with user data (e.g. username and password)

Reviewer: I would make this more verbose:

```suggestion
1. Create the flow with the appropriate purpose and application.
2. Use the flow data to render the UI.
3. Submit the flow with user data.
4. Potentially handle flow errors like invalid values by going back to 2.
5. Handle successful submission.
```

The use-cases can become very complex, but first explaining the "standard" use-case should help people to wrap their head around the concepts.

For more information on the concepts, take a look at the [Self-service flow](../kratos/self-service) documentation.

> ## Creating a flow

Reviewer: In the end this section does not even explain how to create a flow, but only what special params are there.

All browser flows can be initialized with the optional `?return_to=<url>` query parameter. This parameter is used to redirect the
user to the specified URL after the flow is successfully completed.

Some flows, such as login have additional query parameters which can be used in both browser and native applications.

> ## Reusing an existing flow

Reviewer: I am not very happy with this section. What I think is confusing is:

- Wording: we are not "resuing" the flow, but rather fetching it. The reader might think they can create a flow and use it for multiple subsequent logins.
- The section should be further down when some of the more fundamental concepts are explained.
- The text is too generic. It is a complete mystery at this point why "Ory has initialized the flow and redirects to the UI". This might be more clear if that is explained in the "Create" section.

In cases where the flow already exists, we can retrieve the flow data using the flow ID. This is useful in cases where Ory has
already initialized the flow and redirected to the UI. In such a case, the flow ID can be extracted from the URL `?flow=` query
parameter.

Here are some cases where the flow would already exist:

1. Ory has initialized the flow and redirects to the UI (e.g. `/login?flow=<uuidv4>`)
2. The request was completed by the user, however, an error occurred, and we need to retrieve the flow data to display the error
3. The UI has 'stored' the flow ID in the URL so that page refreshes can retrieve the already existing flow data

:::note

The flow ID has an expiration time, so it is important to check the response status code when retrieving the flow data using an

> existing flow ID. It is up to your application to handle this error case and create a new flow.

Reviewer: Error handling should be it's own section. There is also two kinds of errors: validation and all others.

:::

> ## Submitting a flow

Reviewer: This section does also not explain how to submit a flow, and what happens after that. This should be added IMO.

The flow always has to be initialized before any user data (e.g. email and password) can be submitted. Depending on the type of
application (e.g. browser or native) the initialized flow will set a CSRF cookie and return a CSRF token in the response body. It
is important in **browser based applications** to take note of the CSRF tokens since it is required when submitting the user data.

:::warning

Never use API flows to implement Browser applications! Using API flows in Single-Page-Apps as well as server-side apps opens up
several potential attack vectors, including Login and other CSRF attacks.

:::

## Login flow

Login flows are used to authenticate users. When the login is successful, the request will respond with a `200 OK` HTTP status
code and a JSON body containing the user's identity information. When the request fails, it responds with the appropriate HTTP

> status and error messages.

Reviewer: This is not really true. After successful login the server issues a session depending on the application (cookie or token).

### Create Login flow

In browser and native applications, additional options can be specified when creating a login flow such as `?refresh=true` and
`?aal=<level>`. For more information on these options, take a look at the [Self-service flow](../kratos/self-service)
documentation.

````mdx-code-block
<Tabs groupId="sdk-examples">

<TabItem value="go" label="Go" default>

```mdx-code-block
import createLoginApi from '!!raw-loader!../../code-examples/sdk/go/selfservice/create-login.go'

<CodeBlock language="go">{createLoginApi}</CodeBlock>
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="typescript" label="TypeScript">

```mdx-code-block
import createTsLoginApi from '!!raw-loader!../../code-examples/sdk/typescript/src/selfservice/login/create-login-native.ts'

<CodeBlock language="ts">{createTsLoginApi}</CodeBlock>
```

</TabItem>

<TabItem value="react" label="React">

```mdx-code-block
import createReactLoginApi from '!!raw-loader!../../code-examples/sdk/typescript/src/selfservice/login/create-login-react.tsx'

<CodeBlock language="ts">{createReactLoginApi}</CodeBlock>
```

</TabItem>

</Tabs>
````

> #### Two-Factor authentication

Reviewer: We should add to this section that an login flow is also used to upgrade an `aal1` to an `aal2` session.

Two-Factor authentication (2FA) is a second step to confirming the user's credentials with another credential, such as `TOTP` or
`TouchID`. When creating a login flow, you can specify the `?aal=<level>` query parameter to specify the level of authentication.

In Ory the levels are:

- aal1: Password or OIDC

> - aal2: aal1 + TOTP or WebAuthn or Lookup Secrets

Reviewer: Maybe instead link to `../mfa/overview#authenticator-assurance-level-aal`

In the case of initializing a second factor, the user must already have a valid session cookie. The
[`/sessions/whoami`](../reference/api#tag/frontend/operation/toSession) endpoint will return with an error with an id
`session_aal2_required` if the user is required to complete a second factor. More information on UI error messages can be found on

> the [Customize user interface](../kratos/concepts/ui-user-interface) page.

Reviewer: This seems a bit irrelevant for understanding login flows.

For more information on Multi-factor authentication take a look at the [Multi-factor authentication](../kratos/mfa/overview).

### Get Login flow

````mdx-code-block
<Tabs groupId="sdk-examples">

<TabItem value="go" label="Go" default>

```mdx-code-block
import getLoginApi from '!!raw-loader!../../code-examples/sdk/go/selfservice/get-login.go'

<CodeBlock language="go">{getLoginApi}</CodeBlock>
```

</TabItem>

<TabItem value="typescript" label="TypeScript">

```mdx-code-block
import getTsLoginApi from '!!raw-loader!../../code-examples/sdk/typescript/src/selfservice/login/get-login-native.ts'

<CodeBlock language="ts">{getTsLoginApi}</CodeBlock>
```

</TabItem>

<TabItem value="react" label="React">

```mdx-code-block
import getReactLoginApi from '!!raw-loader!../../code-examples/sdk/typescript/src/selfservice/login/get-login-react.tsx'

<CodeBlock language="ts">{getReactLoginApi}</CodeBlock>
```

</TabItem>

</Tabs>
````

### Submit Login flow

We can submit the login flow with user data (e.g. username and password) using the flow ID. Depending on the type of application
(e.g. browser or native) the CSRF tokens are required in the request body and cookie.

> In some cases, such as submitting WebAuthn passwordless, the response code could be `422` which indicates that the browser needs

Reviewer: I think 422 is a typo here.

to be redirected with a newly created flow. In Single Page Applications (SPAs) instead of redirecting, the response can be decoded

> and the new flow ID extracted.

Reviewer: This concept of JSON payload vs redirect is true for basically all API calls and should be explained way earlier, not in this subsubsection.
